---
title: Advanced use cases
taxonomy:
    category: docs
    label: user guide
---


## Low level architecture

The `mender-monitor` service supports the following directory structure:


```bash
/etc/mender-monitor
`-- monitor.d
    |-- available
    |   |-- log_auth_root_session.sh
    |   `-- service_mender-connect.sh
    |-- dbus.sh
    |-- enabled
    |   |-- log_auth_root_session.sh -> /etc/mender-monitor/monitor.d/available/log_auth_root_session.sh
    |   `-- service_mender-connect.sh -> /etc/mender-monitor/monitor.d/available/service_mender-connect.sh
    |-- log.sh
    `-- service.sh
```


What is listed under the root level of `monitor.d` are the Subsystems (`log.sh`, `dbus.sh` and `service.sh`).

The directory `monitor.d/available` lists the created Checks. By using `create` and `delete`, `mender-monitorctl` will create or delete a Check which means it will create the file in the correct naming convention and define variables within it. The name convention follows the structure:

```
<monitoring_subsystem_name>_<check_name>.sh
```

For examples listed one is a Check for the log Subsystem (**log**_auth_root_session.sh) and the other for the service (**service**_mender-connect.sh).


A Check needs to be enabled before it will be taken into consideration. By runing `mender-monitorctl` with the `enable` or `disable` parameters, it will create a symbolic link inside the `enabled` folder to the right check from the `available` folder. From this folder the `mender-monitor` service executes the defined Subsystems based on the enabled Checks.


## Advanced use cases

The following use cases extend beyond the typical usage of Mender Monitor, but they are attainable due to the tool's customizable design.

### Bypassing mender-monitorctl

Since the Checks and Subsystems are represented by a directory structure there is an option to modify the files directly instead of using the CLI tool. 

### Using the library 
To use the Mender Monitor library, first you need to source the enviroment with the function set provided to interact with the Mender Server and Monitor logic.

```bash
cd /usr/share/mender-monitor
source lib/monitor-lib.sh
```

Once the enviroment is sourced, there will be new functions available to use. For example `monitor_send_alert`, this function is used to send the alert data (_OK_ or _CRITICAL_) to the Mender Server.

This function takes the following parameters:

```bash
monitor_send_alert "alert_type" "alert_description" "alert_details" "subject_name" "subject_status" "subject_type" "log_pattern" "log_file_path" "lines_before" "line_matching" "lines_after"
```

**Sending a OK alert**

By sending an _OK_ alert you can clean your alert level. Assuming you did not implement it on your
subsystem, then you can force it by running a command similar to the one below (assuming a _service subsystem_):

```bash
SERVICE_NAME = "your-service-name"
monitor_send_alert OK "Service ${SERVICE_NAME} running" "The main process is present again" "${SERVICE_NAME}" "running" "service"
```

### Pseudo Subsystems

##### Docker events

The log subsystem is a base for so-called _pseudo subsystems_. One of them
is the `dockerevents` subsystem, which you can use to monitor any events as reported by `docker events`
command.

For instance, to monitor for `kill` event on a container named `scanner` you need to create a check with
`mender-monitorctl` command and enable it in the following way:

```bash
mender-monitorctl create dockerevents scanner_kill scanner kill 16
mender-monitorctl enable dockerevents scanner_kill
systemctl restart mender-monitor
```

With the above configuration you will receive a `CRITICAL` alert if someone or something kills your scanner container.
This will lead the Mender UI to present the device in a critical monitoring state. Since there is no natural
way to recover from this situation, we are using the last and optional argument
to the `mender-monitorctl create dockerevents` command which stands for the number of seconds
after which the Mender Monitor daemon sends an automatic _OK_. In that way after 16s without
a `kill` event on the container the device will recover to normal state.

The resulting check uses the log monitor, as you can see with:

```bash
cat /etc/mender-monitor/monitor.d/available/log_scanner_kill.sh
```

> ```bash
> # This file was autogenerated by Monitoring Utilities based on the configuration
> SERVICE_NAME="scanner_kill"
> LOG_PATTERN=".*container kill.*name=scanner.*"
> LOG_FILE="@docker events"
> LOG_PATTERN_EXPIRATION=16
> LOG_ALERT_DESCRIPTION="Docker container scanner kill"
> LOG_ALERT_DETAILS="Alert was raised due to:%line_matching"
> LOG_ALERT_STATUS=DOCKEREVENTS_CONTAINER_RESTART
> LOG_ALERT_TYPE=docker_event
> ```

### Writing new Subsystems

[A] Examples from the demo can serve as references
